Lördag 19 augusti 2017
Police: Danish submarine
was sunken deliberately
Mats Bråstedt

The Swedish journalist Kim Wall, 30, an accomplished reporter whose work has appeared in international publications including The New York Times and The Guardian, has been missing since Thursday evening.

She was last seen departing the Copenhagen harbour aboard the submarine alongside the inventor Peter Madsen.

Colleagues of the journalist have told Expressen her friends waved her off around 7pm on Thursday. On Friday morning the submarine was discovered as it was about to sink. Peter Madsen was rescued from the vessel and later arrested by police.

His initial explanation was that he dropped Kim Wall off at shore on Thursday evening around 10.30pm. However on Sunday police said his story has changed, but did not elaborate further.

– In our first press statement we said he explained he left her at 22.30 (on Thursday) at Refshaleøe. Given that I'm now telling you that he has given conflicting explanations, it is correct that we have been given a different explanation, said Jens Møller, chief of the Copenhagen police homicide division.

The search for Kim Wall is ongoing. Police are searching the sea outside Copenhagen with assistance by the Danish defence forces, which have allocated resources including an airplane to the search.

On Tuesday the Copenhagen police announced that the search will continue by plane. Since Monday she has been sought-after internationally, and the Swedish police are assisting the search. So far the Police have been contacted by nearly 300 witnesses, many with pictures of the vessel before its disappearance.

– We have taken a number of minor invesigation measures and are prepared to do more. We have are cooperating with the Danish police in the investigation, says Mattias Sigfridsson, detective in charge of the investigation in Sweden.

An official with the Danish defence forces told Expressen the water search is focused on finding a body.

– We are not doing a search and rescue operation for a living person. We are looking for a body, I'm afraid, said Ole Theill Sörensen, duty officer with the Joint Defence Command.

The case of the missing journalist has been covered extensively in Swedish and Danish media, as well as by international news outlets.

Kim Wall is a journalist with an impressive CV, which includes bylines in the Times, Guardian, TIME, Vice, Foreign Policy, and Harper's Magazine.

Her friends and colleagues have described her as a driven and ambitious journalist who tends to seek out unusual stories.

– When I saw the story on the news I felt it was the kind of story Kim would do. I wasn't surprised it was she that had been on the submarine, said Ye Ming, a New York-based photographer who has been working with Kim Wall on a separate story in recent months.

A Scottish reporter who studied with Kim Wall at Clumbia University's journalism school, Christopher Harress, said he has long been an admirer of her work.

– As a journalist she is just so filled with wanderlust. Her stories are always well thought out and written in the best interest of the people they're about.

– She is just such a lovely person who people always want to be around.

Mutual friends have told Mr. Harress that Kim Wall was planning to pitch the submarine story to the U.S. tech magazine Wired. She was doing preparatory reporting when she went missing.

The Guardian wrote in a comment to Expressen:

"Kim Wall has contributed a number of pieces for the Guardian - we hope she is found safe and well".

Her family wrote in a statment:

"It is with great dismay we, her family, received the news that Kim went missing during an assignment in Denmark. We believe and sincerely hope that she will be found in good health". The family added:

"Kim is strongly focused, ambitious and dedicated to her work. She writes a lot about social issues, foreign politics, pop culture and gender equality issues".

The Danish submarine builder, Peter Madsen, was jailed on Saturday while the investigation proceeds.

He intially told the press, through a defence attorney, that he had something he wanted to explain about Kim Wall's disappearance.

But a Copenhagen judge ruled the court session on Saturday be held behind closed doors, and Madsen was unable to make his revalation known.

The submarine was retrieved from the bottom of the harbour on Saturday and towed to a dock in the Copenhagen area, where it was searched by police techinicians on Sunday morning.

Police fear that the salt water inside the vessel will destory important evidence.

But technicians were able to establish two important facts which were presented to the press: no one was found inside the submarine, and the vessel appears to have been sunken deliberately.

Madsen has claimed the vessel sunk because of a techinical problem.

He is suspected of causing Kim Wall's death by criminal negligence. He denies the allegation.

Monday night Expressen published the last known moving pictures of Kim Wall.

They were taken by a man, who on a fishing trip, saw the submarine outside Copenhagen – just hours before Kim Wall was reported missing.

The time was 7.55pm and not even an hour had passed after Peter Madsen and Kim Wall entered the vessel.

– I waved to her, and she waved back, the man told Expressen.

Accordning to two of Kim Wall's friends, Sebastian Dahlin Lundberg and Malin Franzén, her disappearance has made them baffled:

– It´s just been compleatly biizarre and horryfying from the moment we realised this was about Kim. But we are now focusing on the fact that she is smart and a survivor.

Just days before the detention was the scientist, who is now suspected of having caused the disappearance of Swedish Kim Walls's death, in a new dispute with his former company.

– His priority was rockets and I can not see him let anything else get in the way of it," says work colleague Gwaino Razz.

Madsen would have driven the submarine to Bornholm on Friday morning. Gwaini Razz is surprised that the submarine dropped during Thursday, so close to the trip to Bornholm.

At Copenhagen Suborbital they do not want to talk about Peter Madsen.

– It's a tragic event and we hope the woman will be found soon. But we do not want to say anything about Peter Madsen, says Rune Henssel, one of the forefront figures in the project.

Several who know Peter Madsen describe him as a definite leader who knows what he wants and therefore sometimes can have a hard time working with others. Friends also describes Peter Madsen as fully absorbed by his very ambitious and often seemingly impossible projects.

On Wednesday the district court changed the violation of the detained submarine owner Peter Madsen, writes Danish Ekstrabladet.

He is now suspected of the Danish counterpart to gross assault to another's death on the missing Swedish journalist Kim Wall - a crime that can give up to eight years in prison.

– He is obviously very affected by this," says lawyer Betina Hald Engmark.

Prior to the hearing on Saturday, Peter Madsen was suspected of murder / manslaughter. However, it was classified down to the classification now established: grossly enduring the death of another.
